How do you approach failures in life? 



Yes, failures can be painful. But does it define you and prevent you from learning from your mistakes or does it serve as a powerful mechanism to embrace new challenges. 

Our mind plays a very powerful role in what we believe and how we think. What we think about ourselves and our abilities decides how we act and lead our life. 

When you look at successful people or those who have achieved mastery in life, what do you tell yourself – they are more gifted than others, they have talent, their innate abilities made them successful or do you believe success comes from hard work, developing new strategies, drawing inspiration from others, getting good mentoring, investing in learning and through constant improvement. 

What you believe is what you achieve. Conscious or unconscious, how you choose to interpret your experiences can set the boundaries on what you can accomplish. 

There’s power in believing that you can improve and accomplish what you set out to achieve by looking at failures and setbacks as a medium for growth. It’s being resilient in the face of challenging circumstances with unintended consequences. 

So, how do we shift ourselves from being limited by our abilities and intelligence to finding freedom in building them. How do we commit to a path of learning and growth?

Before we can enable this switch, it’s important to understand the concept of 2 types of mindsets developed by Carol Dweck, researcher at Stanford University – Fixed mindset vs Growth mindset. 

2 mindsets: Difference between fixed mindset vs growth mindset

A person with a fixed mindset is constrained by their beliefs and thoughts. They believe people are born with special talents and every person has different abilities and intelligence that cannot get better with time, persistence and effort. 

They think of failures as a validation of their lack of intelligence and their limited abilities that prevents them from achieving their goals. They give up easily with the fear of failure and a belief that they cannot improve.

A person with a growth mindset finds freedom in their thoughts and beliefs. They understand that certain people have special talents and that intelligence varies from person to person, but it’s also something that can be developed and increased with effort and hard work. 

They take joy in the learning process that comes from seeking new information, forming new strategies, and taking inspiration from others. They embrace difficulties and challenges as a means to develop new skills and grow. 

Some of the key differences between fixed mindset vs growth mindset are:

Fixed mindset is limiting
Talents, abilities and intelligence is fixed, it’s who we are
Run from error, do not engage with it with a desire to look smart
Avoid challenges
Give up easily 
Feel threatened by the success of others
Ignore negative feedback even though it may be highly relevant and useful
Avoid new experiences with fear of failure
Look for people who can reinforce their self esteem 
Focus on the outcome since they consider results as their identity
Can lead to cheating and deception
Growth mindset is freedom
Talents, abilities and intelligence can be developed through effort and practice
Engage deeply and process the error with a desire to correct the error
Embrace challenges
Persevere in the face of failures and setbacks 
Find inspiration in others success
Accept criticism as a way to learn 
Embrace novelty with a desire to master new skills 
Look for people who challenge them to grow
Focus on the process and learning without worrying about the outcome
Leads to collaboration and innovation  
In her book Mindset, Carol Dweck beautifully sums up the 2 types of mindsets

When you enter a mindset, you enter a new world. In one world—the world of fixed traits—success is about proving you’re smart or talented. Validating yourself. In the other—the world of changing qualities—it’s about stretching yourself to learn something new. Developing yourself. In one world, failure is about having a setback. Getting a bad grade. Losing a tournament. Getting fired. Getting rejected. It means you’re not smart or talented. In the other world, failure is about not growing. Not reaching for the things you value. It means you’re not fulfilling your potential. In one world, effort is a bad thing. It, like failure, means you’re not smart or talented. If you were, you wouldn’t need effort. In the other world, effort is what makes you smart or talented. You have a choice. Mindsets are just beliefs. They’re powerful beliefs, but they’re just something in your mind, and you can change your mind 

Get your FREE copy of the 30 Day Growth Mindset Challenge at the end of this article

Disadvantages of a fixed mindset
Kids start showing signs of either a fixed mindset or growth mindset from an early age. 

Do they worry about getting the best scores, look for constant validation of their ideas, refuse to put in more effort or are scared to try hard problems with the fear that they might fail? That’s a fixed mindset. 

This mindset refrains them from developing new skills, exploring new solutions, devising new strategies and most important of all dreaming bigger. 

They will be quick to label their struggle with a particular subject as “I am simply not good at it. I can’t get better even if I try”. Instead of putting in their best effort to cope up with challenge and difficulty, they will simply give in to self-doubt. 

If we raise a generation of such kids, we can hardly have hopes of a better future. 

In the workplace, fixed mindset shows up when we avoid constructive conflicts, stick to existing solutions even when there’s a need to try new ideas, do not speak up with the fear we might sound stupid, refuse to take up a new challenge with uncharted territory, blame others for not meeting our goals or feel jealous of others success and growth.

It can make us lead from fear, show reluctance in making hard decisions, avoid responsibility and cripple innovation and collaboration. Without learning skills essential for growth and development, we can only dream of success without ever realising it.  
